---
layout: post
title: "Cogency: how strong is your argument?"
description: It's one thing to make an argument that looks plausible; you can dress it up with fancy words and use tactics that sometimes work on the untrained. It's another thing to make an argument that withstands educated scrutiny.
categories: "blog"
published: true
---

Cogency refers to the strength of an argument. I'm talking about its real integrity, at its core. It's one thing to make an argument that looks plausible; you can dress it up with fancy words and use tactics that sometimes work on the untrained. It's another thing to make an argument that withstands educated scrutiny. For guidance on how to scrutinize educatedly, we again look to Trudy Govier's [A Practical Study of Argument](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/8a9b/67f4d4d1283b711fce2095b4f3afcf61daa2.pdf).

Last week I explained how to standardize an argument, but I didn't fully explain why it's useful to be able to do so. The reason why it's useful is that when an argument is in standardized form, it is much easier to evaluate. We do this by assessing its premises on three criteria: acceptability, relevance, and sufficiency. For example:

P1. Dogs are so cute.
P2. I want a dog.
C3. Dogs are so much better than cats.

First we ask, "are the premises true, or can we at least accept them provisionally?" P1 seems acceptable enough to me. I mean, one can conceive of a dog that is not "so cute," but in general, this seems to hold up. I can't reasonably question the acceptability of P2; the only person who knows what a particular person wants is that particular person, so we can accept this too.

Next we ask, "are the premises relevant to the conclusion?" P1 could be relevant, for example, if it were shown that the quality of so-cute-ness is not one that cats happen to possess, and that so-cute-ness is a quality that contributes substantially to the overall worth of a particular thing. So P1 probably passes the relevance test. How about P2? Not really, no. The fact that somebody wants a dog doesn't have any clear connection to the claim that dogs are better than cats. It only tells us about that person's desires.

As soon as a premise fails to satisfy one of the three criteria, we have to dismiss that premise and consider whether or not the argument still holds up. It may still be cogent – for example, in the case that one or more of the premises is superfluous. It's important to recognize that sometimes an argument will contain more premises than it actually needs.

Sufficiency is contained within relevancy; a premise cannot be sufficient to establish a conclusion unless it is also relevant to it. Since P2 was shown to be irrelevant, we automatically know that it is insufficient. P1, however, passed the relevance test because we could imagine a potential connection between it and the conclusion. Obviously, though, it's not sufficient. There are plenty of things that are "so cute," including, perhaps, cats.

So we can reject the conclusion. That doesn't mean we can automatically assume that its opposite is true, of course; it just means that we shouldn't be convinced by the argument.

There are dozens of very common logical fallacies out there, but I won't bother to list them because every single one of them is just a violation of either acceptability, relevance, or sufficiency. If you keep these three criteria in mind when you form your own arguments and when you analyze the ones you encounter, you'll be in great shape.