---
layout: post
title: "If you're good, you need to talk more"
description: An essay about the virtue of sharing your perspective
categories: "blog"
published: false
---

One evening last fall, I was invited to join a group of ten people to play a board game called Avalon. The game is a contest between two teams: good and bad. The catch is that the bad people, who know each other's identities, are pretending to be good, and so the good people, who know only their own identities, don't know who they can trust. Through a series of public and private votes and discussion at the table, the bad people try to masquerade as good, while the good try to figure out who's who.

The setup is simple, but within minutes the gameplay is dizzying. If you are on the bad team, you have lots of information: you look out at the group and you know exactly which players are lying. But you can't reveal that you know this, lest you undermine their identities or your own. Indeed, the only way to protect this information is to act as if you know only that you yourself are good. If you are on the good team, you have limited information: you know that some people out there are coordinating to deceive you, but not much else. The only resources you have are your eyes, your ears, your voice, and your votes.

When I played Avalon that evening, I was assigned to the good team. I was the only one in the group who had never played before, and barely knew any of the other people, who all knew each other quite well. Because of this, I took a backseat for the first few rounds, speaking little. To my surprise, this caused many players to strongly suspect that I was bad.

"If you're good,” [one of them](https://twitter.com/kevinakwok) said to me, "you need to talk more."

I protested that bad people can speak just as easily as good people. How could my words engender trust when any word I said might be a lie?

What I had failed to understand was that because of the burden of deception, talking is much more cognitively demanding when you have something to hide. It's hard to maintain a consistent lie over the course of the whole game. This means that the best strategy for those on the good team is to consistently share their own thoughts and solicit those of all others. The game will be easiest for the good team if every player is expected to regularly give a clear account of their identity, their observations, and their reasoning. Conversely, the game will be easiest for the bad team without this norm of openness.

--------

*If you're good, you need to talk more.* I've thought about this idea a lot in the past six months, and it seems to me that it goes far beyond the game of Avalon. The dynamics of the game are manifest any time a group of people come together to make a decision. Do the individuals in the group have their own self-interest to consider? Do they have the opportunity to coordinate with others, and covertly? Do they each possess a unique perspective that might influence the outcome of the decision, if they share that perspective honestly? Are they free to withhold their perspective?

I believe there are many situations where the answers to these questions are "yes." And in all those cases, openness is a virtue that is woefully underappreciated. Beyond the utility of making it hard for bad people to thrive, here are four reasons to appreciate openness more than we tend to.

\1. **Openness roots out errors in your thinking faster than any amount of introspection can.** We all believe things that are false. Most of us try to correct these errors whenever we can; nobody likes to mix up their flight dates. Although it can be embarrassing to reveal your mistakes or misconceptions to others, there is no faster way to reveal those mistakes to yourself than to expose them to external scrutiny. As you surely know if you have ever tried to share your ideas with a large audience, it is inevitable that a crowd of others will catch the errors that you couldn't.

\2. **Openness builds trust.** Speaking makes it easier for others to inspect and evaluate your thoughts and intentions, which is what allows them to trust you. Think back to a time when you were suspicious of someone. Even if you couldn't tell their false utterances apart from their true ones, did you wish that they would speak more, or speak less?

Just like in Avalon, by building the habit of speaking openly and concealing little, you will naturally attract others who are easy to trust, and you will repel people who habitually conceal their defective thoughts.

\3. **Openness is what makes the crowd wise.** Taking the outside view—listening to the wisdom of the crowd—is often a good guide to behavior. For example, most of us will be better investors if we buy index funds than if we pick our own stocks.

However, the crowd is only wise if good people like you are contributing your perspective to it. Julia Galef once made the point that it can be fruitful to simultaneously hold both an inside view and an outside view. Even if you ultimately decide to act on the outside view, by noting your inside view, you can at least contribute it to whichever group or forum was the source of your outside view. After all, if you aren't doing this, who is? What makes you so sure that those people are sufficiently informed and uncorrelated from each other that the crowd is wise in the first place?

\4. **Openness is unbiased in its interpretation.** It is tempting to think of silence as a form of neutral abstention. But imagine you're in a meeting at work, and you've been silently listening to the conversation. By the end of the hour, the group has come to an understanding that you disagree with. If you remain silent, the others will assume that you have no qualms with their conclusions. Your silence has sent a message, and that message is false.

In some cases the message may be true, of course; you could just as easily remain silent if you did happen to agree. But either way, silence is interpreted as tacit agreement with the consensus. It is therefore often *biased* in its interpretation, since many people are in the habit of remaining silent when they *don't* agree, or they aren't sure whether they agree. 

As an even more clear-cut case of this, consider what it means not to vote in an election. It has the same effect as voting for whichever outcome won the majority. Silence is not neutral!

None of this is to say that you will be perfectly understood if you speak openly. There is always noise in any message. But by speaking, or by voting, you can at least avoid being *predictably* misunderstood.

------

Many people say we live in a world in which everyone is screaming for more attention, especially online. I predict that if you were to poll 1000 people on whether the average person ought to share more of their own thoughts or listen more to the thoughts of others, the latter option would win, potentially by a landslide. So I want to consider a few objections that people might have to the idea that we should all talk more.

\1. **The more you talk, the more you risk being perceived as rude.** It's a rare person who becomes disliked or avoided for talking too *little*. This is doubly true in contentious conversations. Parents caution their children: "think before you speak", "don't be a blabbermouth", and "if you don't have something nice to say, don't say anything at all." When optimizing for politeness, restraint is always preferable to openness.

It's understandable that when we socialize our children, we hint at there being a linear relationship between words spoken and politeness. But the relationship is not linear. You can talk too much, but you can also talk too little.

I've heard it said that if you're in a conversation with one other person, you should aim to talk 50% of the time. This generalizes well: if you’re in a conversation with five people, try to speak 20% of the time. 10 people, 10%. Etc. And if you can, use some of that time to prompt the quieter people, so as to make the conversation less lopsided than it usually is.

\3. **It is considered ineffectual, and sometimes actively counterproductive, to opine on subjects in which you are uninformed or undecided.** We internalize the idea that we need to do our homework and think through our positions carefully before sharing, so that we don't waste everyone's time and attention.

Now, if you're like me, you often attend work meetings in which you feel doubtful of claims people make. Those people may also be extremely smart. In these meetings I often find it challenging to speak my mind, especially when I need to expend a lot of energy just to understand other people's perspectives, let alone feel confident in my own.

But I have learned, through feedback and experience, that the less confident I am in my opinion, the *more* important it is for me to speak up. I think this is because when I'm feeling uncertain, it's likely that other people are too. The more confident voices tend to dominate the conversation, and everyone else tends to nod along or just sit there in silence. It's far better to say "I don't know about this, but I need some time to think about why" than to say nothing and *then* go off and do your homework. Again: silence is tacit agreement with the consensus. Honestly revealing your uncertainty is better than that.

\4. **It is often costly to offer perspectives that ultimately get rejected by the group.** If you know that the group's decision will fall within certain parameters, and your own ideal solution lies outside those parameters, then it may be best to argue for the best option among those that are likely to be accepted, rather than be totally ignored while arguing for a moonshot. For example, many people who would prefer above all else an unlikely political outcome will instead vote for their favorite option among those they think are likely.

I think it's okay to sometimes set aside your unpopular ideas and invest in ones that have a chance of winning. But an idea doesn't have to win, or even be accepted by anybody, for it to influence the broader conversation or the outcome in a meaningful way. In fact, if you earnestly believe something that many people don't—and *won’t*—this may be a time when you have an unusually high chance of making a difference.

----

*If you're good, you need to talk more.* There are five main ways that I've tried to implement this philosophy in my daily life.

The first is participating more actively on Twitter. This means writing more Tweets of my own, and responding more frequently to others. I'm sure Twitter will someday be supplanted by a better online social network, with better systems for bringing out the best in us. But for now, Twitter is where the most interesting, optimistic people seem to be congregating. If you make an effort to learn how to use it in a positive way, I think Twitter is the best forum for participating in edifying conversations online.

The second is writing more blog posts. Writing takes a lot of work, and more often than not, I find that I what I write doesn't bring me much recognition or attention. But occasionally I hear a word or two of thanks for sharing an idea or resource that helped someone with something, and this is enough to keep me producing. I try to think of my blog as a place where I write advice to my past self. This helps to remind me which insights or ideas that feel obvious to me right now are actually not obvious at all.

The third is being more vocal at work: speaking up more in meetings, writing more thorough documentation, leaving more detailed comments in code reviews, and sharing links that are relevant to company projects in the `#random` Slack channel. I work at a startup that seems poised to do big things, so I think of my communicativeness within the company as one of the best opportunities I currently have to make a difference in the world.

The fourth is making an effort to be as open and responsive as possible with my family and friends: reaching out more, responding faster, expressing dissatisfaction more readily, and offering praise whenever it occurs to me. I don't know that I ever had problems in this domain, but it's on my mind more these days, and I'm fortunate to say that my relationships all feel very healthy.

The fifth is still aspirational, but will hopefully be realized soon: play Avalon again! I've bought it, but have yet to take the initiative to bring together enough people to play.

Luckily, real life is rarely as adversarial as Avalon, so we don't usually need to be so wary of liars in our midst. But I highly recommend finding a group of people to play the game with, because it's a blast. (If you live in Vancouver, message me and we'll get some people together!) I know of no experience that better demonstrates the challenges of collaborative truth-seeking, and the responsibility of good people to talk more.